# Understanding the Effects of Deep Breathing on Motor Regions of the Brain

## Introduction
In humans, passive respiration is largely an autonomic process, with brain activity during this event commonly classified as resting state(RS). However, humans have the ability to take control of respiratory patterns by modulating the rate and depth of each breath. The present study is an extension of Gaurav et al.’s analytical study, which explores the effect of deep breathing on the brain. We compare the effect of shallow and deep breathing on the alpha, beta, and theta rhythms of the motor regions of the brain. Further, the study also presents a neural network based classification model which uses EEG data to predict breathing patterns.

## Materials
The dataset contains EEG data of 29 healthy subjects between the ages of 18 and 30 years, each first performing shallow breathing (resting state) for 15 seconds followed by 15 seconds of deep breathing(DB). The 32-channel scalp EEG dataset was pre-processed, and 15-second windows of resting-state belonging to all subjects were concatenated to create a (29x15) second grand resting state dataset. Similarly, we concatenate all EEG states corresponding to deep breathing and create a grand deep breathing dataset. After visual inspection, the artifacts in the grand resting state and deep breathing datasets were rejected.

## Methods
The dataset was transformed into the spectral domain, and the power spectrum was calculated to assess the change in brain activity when subjects changed breathing patterns from shallow to deep. We calculated the average change in brain activity across each electrode. This percentage change in power was calculated for each frequency band, ie. the theta, alpha, and beta frequency band. After observing a unanimous decrease in power across all electrodes in the theta and alpha frequency bands, the study uses a k-means based multiple cluster classification model for predicting the breathing pattern using EEG data. This model clustered both the grand resting state and grand deep breathing EEG time series into ‘k’ clusters each and utilized cluster centroid data to perform classification. The classification accuracies were insignificant due to the highly varied nature of the resting data. The highly disparate values of peak and average inter-subject resting-state coherence confirmed the variability among resting-state data. To overcome clustering inefficiencies, we implemented a neural network based classification model to predict breathing patterns corresponding to a given EEG state.

## Results
When compared with resting state data, EEG data during deep breathing shows a unanimous decrease in brain activity among the theta and alpha frequency bands. The average percentage decrease in brain activity across all electrodes was 25% for theta waves and 33.5% for alpha waves. Using multiple cluster-based k-means, we observed an increase in classification accuracy with an increase in the number of clusters. The classification accuracy peaked at 65.28% with k=4(four clusters corresponding to the grand RS and grand DB datasets each). We used a neural network-based pipeline to improve the classification accuracy, which resulted in a 90.97% classification accuracy.

## Conclusions
Even though deep breathing is a voluntary task involving the use of the motor regions of the brain, deep breathing results in a consistent reduction in average brain activity. While the reduction in power was observed among all frequency bands, it was most prominent among the alpha frequency band. The neural network based pipeline results in high classification accuracy, which indicates a high cross-subject similarity among EEG data during deep breathing. Moreover, this real-time classification model with the ability to predict the breathing pattern has potential applications in assessing the subject-specific effectiveness of deep breathing-based techniques to calm the brain.
